Now,
I would like to share with you the qualities I have seen
that distinguish managers from leaders.
The difference can seem subtle,
but these examples will help you see the difference.
As an example, before we get started, think about this,
a manager says go, a leader says let's go.
Okay, the first one, working within boundaries versus expanding boundaries.
For example, budget.
A leader would go ask for more get creative.
A manager may just work within that budget boundary and not think about
asking and moving it forward in a different approach.
Controlling resources versus influencing others.
A leader will need to influence others beyond their direct report.
Remember, as a project manager,
you'll have team members from different organizations
who don't directly work for you, and therefore,
you'll need to use your leadership skills to influence them to a common goal.
Planning to reach tactical goals versus creating a vision of the future.
Sure, you'll have tactics you have to meet,
but always with the long term vision of the future in mind.
Deciding present actions based on the past or precedents versus
deciding present actions based on the envisioned future.
Again, the leader is always looking out to the future,
long term, long range strategic.
Next,
waiting for all relevant data before deciding versus
pursuing enough data to decide more quickly,
and this is where feeling comfortable in gray areas
is very important as a leader.
Last,
measuring performance against plans versus assessing
accomplishment against vision.
Plans are needed certainly,
but you're always looking at what's accomplished against
a backdrop of the long term vision.
One of the key and most important attributes of a leader is trust.
If they trust you they will follow you on all levels.
So here is a quick list of tips on how to build trust with either your customer,
stakeholder, your management, and certainly your team members.
First, have clear and concise and consistent goals.
People want to know what's important and what
activities they should be focused on.
Be open, fair, and listen.
Don't ever show favorites in people or organizations.
Treat everyone equally.
Be decisive.
Don't be wishy washy.
That is why you will need to make quality decisions with little or no data.
Admit mistakes.
Yep, that's tough, but show you are human,
but also willing to take one for the team.
Support all team members.
Don't exclude anyone.
Take responsibility for team actions.
When the team does great, the team gets the credit.
And when the team doesn't do that well, then you take the responsibility,
no blame to others.
Give credit to team members.
Always thank them and give recognition to team members that deserve it,
either privately, and I even think more effectively,
in front of others.
Be sensitive to the needs of the team members.
Be a good listener and show empathy, real empathy.
Don't fake it.
Respect the opinions of others.
You may not always agree and you don't have to,
but listen and respect their opinions.
Lastly, create a climate that allows empowerment.
Remember, you need to get things done through others.
Remember, the success of the project is all about growing others.
Here is another quote I like about leadership,
but first,
so now that you have a better understanding of what leadership
is and what it takes to be a good leader,
but the only way to become a good leader is to get in there and give it a try.
So this quote, "Leadership, like swimming,
cannot be learned by reading about it.
" So moving from a software engineering world of
experiences into the project management and leadership
world is a bit daunting and even scary, but if you try,
you may find greater rewards in your professional development.
Okay, so next are the things I want you to try to practice becoming a better leader.